---
date: 2022-03-28
layout: post
slug: why-i-work-at-wasmer
title: Why I Work At Wasmer
categories:
- Mill Grist
---

I've recently started working at [Wasmer](https://wasmer.io), a company that is surrounded by a notable amount of controversy. I've made [an archive](/notes-wasmer-controversy) of all the matters of which I am aware.

Perhaps the most well-known concern is that Wasmer attempted to register trademarks for the terms "WEBASSEMBLY" and "WASM". Wasmer is [a 2019 batch YCombinator startup](https://www.ycombinator.com/companies/wasmer), therefore very much a for-profit company. But it is working in the Open Source world of [WebAssembly](https://webassembly.org/) (Wasm). So to register those trademarks is an unequivocal cardinal sin. Syrus Akbary, the CEO, claims that [it was unintentional and part of a process to create a non-profit WebAssembly foundation](https://wasmer.io/posts/wasmer-and-trademarks). From the admittedly short time (a few weeks of long interviews) I've known Syrus, I find it hard to believe that he would lie about such a thing. I simply can't fathom how he could have imagined the company would be able to function in the Open Source community if it owned such cherished non-profit trademarks.

There is however a matter which is less well-known, but to me significantly more important. About 3 years ago, not long after Wasmer formed, Syrus attended a Wasm conference where members of Wasmer's foremost competitors ([Wasmtime](https://wasmtime.dev/)) were also attending. One of those members, [Lin Clark](https://twitter.com/linclark), later tweeted that Syrus had: "… Touched me in a prolonged, overly-familiar way at a wasm event, making me uncomfortable …".

Syrus' handling of this was poor. I'd like to think that I'd be more mature in such a situation, but I honestly don't know if I actually would be. I may well have more of a background in things that should theoretically make me emotionally mature, but my foreground, where I invest my time and identity, is software engineering. I choose to work in this industry in large part because I'm advantaged as a white, British man. There are an uncountable number of non-white, non-First World females that have significantly more aptitude than me. And there are numerous non-geeky but underpaid jobs that I would flourish in. But make no mistake about it, I'm attracted to the easy money and freedom. I love to think that I'm here because it's where my exceptional talents belong, but the sober truth is that I'm mostly just exploiting the meritless serendipities of my birth.

Of course I'm also attracted to the potential of Wasm, Wasmtime and Wasmer. It genuinely excites me that I could contribute to the fabled, long-awaited demise of Javascript. But even if I had the extraordinary good fortune to be part of that, it would still not even amount to a fraction of what people like Lin Clark achieve on an average day before lunchtime. Not only is Lin Clark playing a completely different game from me, with much bigger prizes, but she's playing that game in "Nightmare Mode", whilst I play mine in "Easy Mode". Such is the fabled, long-awaited demise of inequality.

At face value, the signs seem obvious that I shouldn't work at Wasmer. Indeed I made that very clear to my interviewers once I realised the full extent of the controversies. But on reflection it's actually not that obvious. Maybe I'm just unlucky in my career, but I honestly don't feel I'd be in any better position to fight the good fight if I was in a different tech company. I should be clear that that in no way justifies nor excuses Wasmer's behaviour. I just mean to say that on balance Wasmer is less worse. Tech in general has major power and diversity problems. I can't be so noble as to say that my discomfort with Syrus is that he diminishes my capacity to fight the good fight. No. My discomfort is that I see myself in him. Turning away from Wasmer is just as much about me turning away from my own implicit and explicit roles in the systemic inequality that doesn't just plague tech, but forms its basis.

I can't ever hope to make the kind of achievements that Lin Clark does. I'm just already too overly represented. But at the very least I can strive to not turn away. I'm a white, British man. I work in the software industry. I work at a YC startup. I work at Wasmer. The friction and suffering that these facts inevitably cause are not obstacles to the "real" work of writing code. They are the work. What use is Wasm, a language that unites all languages, if I can't even hear the most basic of all English phrases, "I'm uncomfortable".

Of course I am prepared to help make things better in my industry. But that's not why I choose to work for Wasmer. In fact I want to work for them because I have a rare sense that I can at the very least not make things worse. There is something quite unique about Wasmer which I haven't mentioned yet, but you've already seen it. They welcome my writing and publication of these blog posts. Syrus might not be the ideal example of emotional maturity, but he is uncommonly emotionally available. He doesn't always like what I have to say, but I genuinely feel that he is willing to listen.

I work for Wasmer because when I speak, I am heard.
